# Chapter Five: Scholia Using the First Person Part One#

Part of what makes analyzing the scholia for patterns in Homeric scholarship difficult is that until now it has been nearly impossible to automate searches for specific features. Because we now have digital editions to work with, it is much easier to automate the search process. At the original writing of this thesis, the process was still somewhat manual to perform vocabulary and form searches. Now in 2014, the process is becoming more and more automated and will ideally result in some software tools to perform these searches as part of the hmt-digital release.

One type of scholia I was able to investigate with a fair amount of depth was scholia that use the first person outside the context of quotations. Because the process at the time was not fully automated, I will make no claims that my list is fully comprehensive. I began my search looking into the scholia of the Venetus A because it was the first manuscript to be verifiable using automatic testing. Most of the scholia I was able to find in the Y.1.1 came from a combination of less reliable manual checking and pure luck.As I began to go to through the first person scholia it became apparent that there were several different types at play. The first type that I will discuss here in this chapter use the first person to take the reader into a character’s thoughts to explain the motivations behind what is done or said in the poetry.  I will begin most of my analyses from the Venetus A scholia primarily because the Y.1.1 often either does not have comparable scholia or the comparable scholia do not use the same first person constructions.We have three separate instances in the Venetus A scholia of *Iliad* 8 where the first person is used to explain a character’s thoughts or motivations. The first of these appears on line 8.408, when Zeus remarks that it is in Hera’s nature to attempt to obstruct his plans and since it is her nature, he cannot be angry with her. The scholion reads:αἱεὶ γάρ μοι ἕωθεν ἐνικλᾶν όττι νοήσω·"ἐνικλᾶν" ἐμποδίζειν ἡ μεταφορὰ ἀπο τῶν εἰς τὰς ἀσπίδας ἀποθραυομένων δοράτων· οὕτως δὲ γραπτέον "ὅττι κεν εἴπω" οἶον κατακάμπτειν καὶ μὴ ἐὰν τὰ ὑπ εμοῦ εἰρημένα καὶ πάλιν ἑξῆς ἐν οῖς ἡ Ί ̈ρις φησην (*Iliad* 8.422) "ὅττι κεν εἴπῃ" γράφεται ⁑“For she is always accustomed to hinder me in whatever I have devised:ἐνικλᾶν means “to hinder.” It is a metaphor from spears being struck against shields. And it must be written like so "ὅττι κεν εἴπω." That is, to hinder and not to permit what is said by me. Again it is later written in the lines [that] Iris says  “ὅττι κεν εἴπῃ” (*Iliad* 8.422)” This scholion was particularly difficult to figure out, especially as it seems to tackle two different issues: first the vocabulary choice of ἐνικλᾶν and second what the proper turn of phrase is for the latter half of the line. Imbedded in this second issue is the curious phrase ὑπ εμοῦ, “by me.” In context of the speech and the lines, the only logical conclusion is that the scholiast is imitating the voice of the poetry. We have seen other instances where a scholion explains the actions of a character in the poetry. What makes this one different enough that it merits the use of the first person?Consulting the Y.1.1 proved fairly unfruitful on the subject of this scholion. While there is a comparable scholion in the Y.1.1 manuscript, it contains only some of the material found in the Venetus A and does not continue. Nor does it use the first person like the Venetus A does. The text of this scholion, also commenting on 8.408, reads as follows:ἐμποδίζειν· εἴληπται δὲ ἡ μεταφορὰ, ἀπὸ τῶν εἰς τὰς ἀσπίδας ἀποθραβομένων δοράτων⁑"to hinder" and the metaphor is taken from spears being struck against shields.” This difference reveals aspects of scribal practices and what sources were available. The Y.1.1 scholion is almost verbatim of the first line of the Venetus A scholion. It is quite probable that the two scribes were copying this first sentence from the same source. The question is why does the Venetus A scholion continue and the Y.1.1 end? One possibility is that the Venetus A scribe copied the complete text offered by the source and the Y.1.1 scribe only copied the first sentence, either because he was saving space or did not think the rest of the comment was fitting for the manuscript. Another possibility is that the second portion of the comment was already missing from the source the Y.1.1 scribe was consulting, and he therefore could not add it to the manuscript. Yet another possibility is that the Venetus A scribe compiled his scholion from more than one source, the second of which the Y.1.1 scribe did not have or did not want to use.  The second instance of a first person reference to a character’s thoughts in the Venetus A appears on lines 8.524-8.525, where Hector declares an end to the day’s battle, saying that they have enough success for one day and he looks towards continued victory at dawn. The scholion reads:μῦθος δ' ὃςἀθετοῦνται δύο στίχοι. δι ὅτι τῇ ἑξῆς οὐδὲν λέγει καὶ τὸ ὑποτακτικὸν ἄρθρον ἀντι προτακτικοῦ παρείληπται "ὃς μὲν" ἀντὶ τοῦ "ὁ μέν." ὁ δὲ νοῦς ἐστι τοιοῦτος περι μὲν τῶν νῦν καὶ τήμερον συντετέλεστέ μοι ὁ λόγος καὶ οὐδὲν παραλέλειπται περὶ δὲ τῶν εἰς αύριον ὑπο τὴν ἕω μηνύσω ⁑“The counsel which:The two lines are athetized because the poet says nothing in the following lines  and he substitutes the relative pronoun "ὃς μὲν" instead of the definite article "ὁ μέν." But the intention is of this sort: concerning the things now and today, the speech has been completed by me and nothing is left out and, concerning the things happening tomorrow, at dawn I will reveal them.” The scholion is a little difficult to understand, but it appears to be saying describing the reasons why Aristarchus marks these lines to be athetized.  Nonetheless the scholiast also wants to explain why these lines might fit here. That is why we have a discussion of intent (νοῦς) and we have the first person referring to Hector’s reasons for speaking. This scholion does two things to advance the discussion. First, it is also a speech, indicating that perhaps when we have first person references explaining a character’s thoughts it is because it is in the context of a speech. A speech merits the use of the first person whereas ordinary narration does not. Second, because we can associate the first half of the scholion with Aristarchus, what does this association mean about the second half that uses the first person? Do we assume that because the first half is likely Aristarchaen, the second half might be? Or can we rule out the second half being Aristarchaen because it contradicts Aristarchus’s viewpoint? If the latter is true than we can begin to make hypothesize sources that responded to Aristarchus’s work. There is no comparable scholion in the Y.1.1 for a comment on lines 8.524-8.525.The last scholion in the Venetus A that uses the first person that I will examine appears immediately afterwards on line 8.526. Here we are still in the midst of Hector’s speech, this time discussing the phrase “εὔχομαι ἐλπόμενος.” The text of the scholion reads:εὔχομαι ἐλπόμενοςὅτι Ζηνοδοτος γράφει "ἔλπομαι εὐχόμενος"· οὐ κατα τὸν Ἕκτορα δὲ τὸν οὕτως ἐπηρμένον λέγει, ἐλπίζω εὐχόμενος τοῖς θεοῖς· ἐπιεικὲς γὰρ τουναντιον γὰρ οἰκεῖον "εὔχομαι ἐλπόμενος" καυχώμαι ἐλπιδοποιούμενος ὑπο τοῦ Διὸς καὶ τῶν ἄλλων θεῶν “I pray having hoped:The sign is there because Zenodotus writes "ἔλπομαι εὐχόμενος." He does not say Hector is lifted up thusly, I feel hope praying to the gods. Because the opposite is suitable and appropriate, "I pray, feeling hope." I speak aloud being made hopeful by Zeus and the other gods.” Again we have a rather complicated mincing of words, but the crux of the argument appears to rest on the alternative Zenodotus offers and what the logical order of hoping and praying would be. Does one receive hope and therefore pray or does one pray and therefore become hopeful? There is little change of meaning overall, but the most notable part of this scholion is again the use of the first person to describe Hector’s actions and motivations in the speech. We also have another strong reference to Aristarchaen material in this scholion. Typically scholia that start with ὅτι can be translated “the sign is there because” and are associated with Aristarchus’s critical signs. Here, he presumably disagrees with Zenodotus and thinks instead that the appropriate reading of the line is “εὔχομαι ἐλπόμενος.” If that much can be inferred from the fact that there is a critical sign and the note that Zenodotus offers an alternate reading, the rest of the scholion agrees with Aristarchus’s choice. The question remains, is that because it is Aristarchaen material or because whichever source is responsible happens to agree with Aristarchus. The Y.1.1 can shed further light on the issue with an intriguing comparable scholion on lines 8.526-8.527. It reads:ὅρα τὸ παλίμβολον Ἕκτορος· τῇ γυναικὶ ἔλεγεν "ἔσσεται ἦμαρ ὅτ' ἄν ποτ' ὀλώλῃ Ἴλιος ἱρὴ" (Il. 6.448). ὧδε δὲ ἄλλως· ἐκεῖ μὲν γὰρ τῶν Τρώων ἡττωμένων δύσελπις ἦν· ἐνταῦθα δὲ τῇ μάχῃ κρατῶν. ἐλπίζει τὰ χρηστά⁑“Look at the change of mind of Hector. He was speaking to his wife "The day shall come when sacred Ilion is destroyed" (Il. 6.448). And it is so elsewhere. For there he is despondent because the Trojans were inferior. But here he hopes for good fortune because they are superior in battle.” This scholion does not talk about the alternate reading Zenodotus offers for this line, but like the Venetus A scholion it discusses Hector’s thoughts, and examines how Hector’s attitude towards the war has shifted. There is some discussion of his hopes, but it is only presented as argument for why Hector’s attitude has changed, not an issue of whether he hoped before he prayed or vice versa. The most intriguing aspect of this scholion is the use of the imperative: ὅρα. It is extraordinary that the reader of the scholia is so directly called upon to examine an issue. This kind of participatory reading is intriguing and has led me to consider the stylistic choices of a scholiast. It is notable that all of these scholia that use the first person, and in the Y.1.1’s case an imperative, appear in the context of speeches. Perhaps we ought not try to trace these scholia to a particular source, but to a particular practice. It is possible that using the first person or an imperative is not unusual in the context of explaining speeches. Unfortunately, my data is limited to the scholia I have discussed above. More definitive conclusions could be made using the rest of the scholia in the manuscript, scholia in other Homeric manuscripts, and perhaps even an examination into scholia on other texts, particularly those than frequently include speeches.