# Chapter One: an Introduction to *Iliad* 8, the Manuscripts, and Scholia #

If *Iliad* 8 were not on its own interesting simply because of the fact that it is a book of the *Iliad*, a literary work that has captured the minds of readers and listeners for not just centuries but millennia, its highly debated status in the scholarly field would secure its position. Iliad 8 covers the second day of battle after Achilles removes himself from the battlefield. The book opens with a scene on Olympus, in which Zeus orders the other gods not to interfere on the side of the Greeks lest they incur his wrath. The focus then shifts to the battlefield where the Trojans are repelling the Greeks with great success, so much so that the Greeks begin to retreat.[^fn1] During the retreat one of Nestor’s horses is killed, stranding him with the Trojans closing in. Diomedes, son of Tydeus, goes forth to rescue him and the two depart in one chariot, leaving their drivers to take care of Nestor’s horses.[^fn2] Diomedes wishes to press the attack and fight Hector, however, Zeus thunders three times warning him to retreat. Nestor advises Diomedes to retreat, much to Diomedes’s chagrin, and ultimately Nestor turns the horses around. The fight continues closer to the Greek ships, pushing them all the way to their temporary walls. At this point, as the gods look on, Hera approaches Athena for assistance in defying Zeus and aiding the Greeks. The goddesses prepare a chariot to go down to battle, but are stopped by Zeus before they can depart. The book ends with a speech from Hector, who celebrates their victories and exhorts his soldiers for the next day of battle, and the Trojans set up camp for the night.
 
[^fn1]: There is much controversy in ancient and modern scholarship on how to interpret the fact that Odysseus retreats despite Diomedes calling out to him. I will discuss the ancient scholarship in [Chapter Four](Chapter-Four:-Scholia-on-Odysseus-and-Scribal-Choices-in-Organization-and-Content), but a good take on the modern interpretation can be found in Cook 2009: 144-146. Also see also [Douglas Frame][link1].

[link1]: http://homermultitext.blogspot.com/2013/09/odysseuss-questionable-behavior-in.html

[^fn2]: The chariot rescue is cited by many scholars as parallel to a scene in the *Aithiopis*, which is supposed to be the next story in the Epic Cycle. The crux of most of the debate rests on whether the scene in *Iliad* 8 is the “original” or whether the scene in the *Aithiopis* is the “original.” The *Aithiopis* only survives in summaries from Proclus’s *Chrestomathy* as well as references from Apollodorus and Pindar. A composite translation of various Greek texts we have about the *Aithiopis* can be found in West 2003:1. The rest of West’s article also discusses the validity of this scene as does Cook 2009:146-151. It is my opinion, however, that we need not concern ourselves with whether the *Iliad* or the *Aithiopis* was written or composed first because following the oral tradition of the epics, it is possible that the chariot scene is an archetype of Greek oral epic and that the two stories performed contemporaneously, able to influence the other in creation. Furthermore, it is difficult to make any arguments about the *Aithiopis* when all we have is a summary of the text split among several different authors.My task for this thesis was twofold. I wanted to examine several of the key issues in *Iliad* 8 that are controversial in both modern and ancient scholarship, and I wanted to examine the scholia of Iliad 8 as their own artifact to better understand the ancient tradition of Homeric scholarship was conducted. As I began to run into issues of time, I gave preference to the latter task. Scholia (singular “scholion”) are scholarly commentaries written alongside the main text of the Iliad in medieval manuscripts. They handle a variety of topics, including detailed mythological backgrounds, alternate readings of the text, and grammatical explanations. Using a digital editing process, the details of which I will explain more thoroughly in [Chapter Two](Chapter-Two:-the-Digital-Editing-Process:-Goals-and-Procedures), I created editions of two manuscripts of *Iliad* 8: the Venetus A and the Escorial Y.1.1. The Venetus A is our oldest complete source for the Iliad. It is a 10th century Byzantine manuscript, currently kept in the Biblioteca Marciana in Venice, Italy. In 2007, the Homer Multitext project took digital, high-resolution photographs of the manuscript, including select photographs in ultra-violet light that reveal text no longer visible to the naked eye. All of these photographs are freely available [online][link2] for public use. The Venetus A is one of the most widely published Homeric manuscripts, known not only for its attestation of the Iliadic text, but also for its sizable scholia. The most complete edition of the Venetus A scholia to date was rendered by Karl Wilhem Dindorf in 1875. A more recent edition by Erbse was published beginning in 1969. Erbse’s edition is a composite edition that represents several different manuscripts alongside the Venetus A, grouping the manuscripts together where their content is similar.

[link2]: http://www.homermultitext.org/hmt-image-archive.htmlOne of these other manuscripts is the Escorial Υ.1.1 (sometimes designated by other scholars as the E or E3 manuscript), another complete manuscript of the Iliad, probably composed in Byzantium in the 11th century. The Escorial collection is located in a monastery just outside Madrid, Spain. This manuscript was also photographed by the Homer Multitext team and the photographs were published online in 2010.  As will be treated with greater depth in subsequent chapters, the scholia of the Υ.1.1 represent a parallel tradition to the Venetus A scholia. At times they appear to use similar or even the same sources for their content, but certainly reflect different choices in composition and arrangement. Often, they blatantly diverge and contain material not found in the Venetus A manuscript.[^fn3]
	
[^fn3]: This claim is made based on my own anecdotal observations of not finding comparable scholia between the two manuscripts or finding comparable scholia that are in disagreement between the two manuscripts. It is my hope that eventually we will have at our disposal an automated method of comparing content across two manuscripts to quantify the differences between the two.There are several reasons why the Homeric scholia ought to be studied, and I would argue that they are only just starting to be studied in meaningful ways. Until the recent photography was published online, access to the manuscripts has been limited. Outside of the library, the Venetus A can be viewed using the 1901 facsimile edition created by Domenico Comparetti, which itself is not easily obtained and furthermore is challenging to read given the quality of the facsimile.[^fn4][^fn5] The scholia are available primarily in the print editions of Dindorf and Erbse, which are a restricted medium for representing manuscripts. These editions follow the tradition of creating a critical edition of texts. The texts of their editions have been edited by a modern interpretation of what the correct text is. The editions represent the text in different ways. Dindorf published an edition of only the Venetus A scholia, in several volumes, which he edited and corrected as he saw fit, rarely citing his reasons for emendation in the footnotes. His footnotes are used primarily for a select few features he chose to comment on and could not reflect in his main body of text. The Erbse edition, coming just under a hundred years later, is a composite edition of several manuscripts, with portions of text cited by the letters denoting their manuscript or manuscript “family.” A typical entry in the Erbse edition looks something like this[^fn6]:**“8.1b ex. <κροκόπεπλος:> ὅταν πολὺ σκότους ἔχῃ, ὀλίγον δὲ φωτός. τὸ δὲ “ῥοδοδάκτυλος” (Α 477 al.) ἐναντίον. ποιητικὴ δέ ἐστι περίφρασις, A b (BCE3E4)T ὡσεὶ εἶπεν ‘ἡμέρα μὲν γέγονεν’. A b (BE3E4)T”**

[^fn4]: It is also worthy to note that there are only a few copies of the Comparetti facsimile available in the United States and, as Blackwell and Dué point out in “Homer & History in the Venetus A” *Recapturing a Homeric Legacy* 2009:14, these copies do not circulate freely.
	
[^fn5]: The Homer Multitext project has also taken high quality photographs of the Comparetti facsimile which can be viewed online [here][link3].
	
[^fn6]: This selection is taken from the scholia on *Iliad* 8.1. Erbse typically cites the line, gives a letter based on what he deems to be the distinct comments across the manuscripts he reports, the lemma or suggested lemma since not all manuscripts use lemmata as citations, and the text of the scholion. Selections like “A b (BE3E4)T” state that this comment or something like it is found in the A manuscript, the b family of manuscripts, which Erbse claims includes the B, C, E3 (called in this thesis the Y.1.1), and E4 manuscripts, and the T manuscript. Upper case denotes the single manuscript, lower case denotes entire manuscript “families.”
	
[link3]: http://beta.hpcc.uh.edu/tomcat/hmt-digital/browse?urn=urn:cite:hmt:compThe Erbse edition contains a critical apparatus at the bottom of the page where he includes some textual variations he presumably felt were too insignificant to merit separate entries in the main body of his text. Since his edition attempts to group certain manuscripts together, often different readings are represented in the critical apparatus. Occasionally these different readings can be lengthy and meaningful. This critical apparatus is only present in the print edition of his text, not to be found in the widely used Thesaurus Linguae Graecae (TLG) edition. The absence of the critical apparatus in the TLG edition is an even greater problem for the Υ.1.1 scholia, as they have only been published in the Erbse edition and not in their entirety. Erbse’s choices with his critical apparatus seem to reflect a preference for the Townley (T) manuscript, another 11th century manuscript of the Iliad, kept in the British Museum. The benefit of grouping similar scholia together is useful, helping a reader both organize the types of comments he is reading and perhaps even analyze the range of the tradition of Homeric scholarship, but I believe that when we start losing genuinely different readings of scholia it goes too far. Erbse also notably excludes portions of scholia known as the “D scholia,” scholia erroneously named after Didymus, which rough estimates from the HMT have placed at about twenty percent of the total material.[^fn7]

[^fn7]: For discussion on the different types of Homeric scholia see Dickey 2007: 18-22.If we want to understand the extensive tradition of Homeric scholarship, it is best to have the broadest account of all the evidence. To that end, the Homer Multitext project promotes the creation of diplomatic editions of the Homeric manuscripts. Unlike a conventional critical edition, which seeks to identify one original text and avoid the corruptions of miscopying, a diplomatic edition treats a manuscript as an individual artifact, representing every mark as it appears without attempts to make emendations. The philosophy behind this approach seeks to remedy one of the other major failings of the current editions of the manuscripts and scholia. Manuscripts like the Venetus A and the Υ.1.1 were written so that the scholia could be read alongside the main Iliadic text. No current print edition of the manuscripts publishes the scholia with the main text. The manuscripts also contain a variety of non-textual features which are rarely, if ever, mentioned by modern editions. These features often add layers of meaning to the manuscripts and their texts that are still unclear to us or have not been accurately portrayed in our current editions. Ideally no mark on the manuscript goes unpublished, and as will be detailed more thoroughly in [Chapter Two](Chapter-Two:-the-Digital-Editing-Process:-Goals-and-Procedures), the goals of the HMT editions are to tie associated material together so that in our edition they can be viewed together as the scribes originally intended.The scholia represent of a body of work and a textual tradition that requires further investigation. We know from citations in the scholia themselves, as well as notes of sources written in some manuscripts, such as the Venetus A, that the scholiast (the scribe or scribes responsible for compiling the material of the scholia) drew from multiple sources to annotate the manuscripts. The Venetus A for example, includes subscriptions at the end of almost every book that include a variation of the following:
	{πάρακειται τὰ Ἀριστονικου σημεῖα καὶ τὰ Διδύμου Περι τῆς Ἀρισταρχου διορθώσεως τινὰ δὲ καὶ τῆς Ἰλιακῆς προσωδιως Ἡρωδιανοῦ καὶ ἐκ τῶν Νικάνορος Περι στιγμῆς“Cited are the *Signs of Aristonicus* and Didymus’s *On the Critical Text of Aristarchus* and also some of Herodian’s *Iliadic Prosody* and from Nicanor’s *On Punctuation*.”}[urn1]
	
[urn1]: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026:msAsub:8.0
	The works cited here are extant only as they are preserved in the scholia. One of the ongoing efforts of studying the scholia is the attempt to classify and analyze the types of scholia present in the various Homeric manuscripts. We are not necessarily attempting to go through the scholia and distinguish the original source of each scholion. Such a task would not only require several lifetimes of research, but would also be of little use. By going through and analyzing types of scholia and patterns in how they are written, we do hope to gain a better understanding of the tradition of Homeric scholarship. In this endeavor it is important to consider as many manuscripts as possible. Often the content from manuscript to manuscript is similar enough to be from the same source, but may include a citation of an author present in one manuscript but not another. In order to methodically explore the sources of the scholia, however, we must make sure we are truly representing the manuscripts as they appear. 
	Part of my subsequent research with the scholia of *Iliad* 8 operates under the assumption that the *Iliad* and other stories of the epic cycle were part of a collective oral tradition. I will outline in brief these assumptions and what they mean for my interpretation of the text and their scholia. Our firmest evidence for the oral tradition of Homer stems from the comparisons drawn from Milman Parry’s work both with the Homeric texts and with the “living epic tradition of the Yugoslavs.”[^fn8] Parry’s careful study in the 1930s revealed several key elements of how an oral tradition works. Albert Lord, who carried on Parry’s work after his death, outlines in far greater detail than will appear below the key aspects of oral tradition in his book, *The Singer of Tales*. Lord defines oral epic as follows: “Stated briefly, oral epic song is narrative poetry composed in a manner evolved over many generations by singers of tales who did not know how to write; it consists of the building of metrical lines and half lines by means of formulas and formulaic expressions and the building of songs by the use of themes.”[^fn9] Put another way, this means that oral epic poetry is based on learning a specific language that allows for set phrases and units of text that allow a singer to compose rapidly. Not only could singers compose rapidly, but they could compose rapidly in performance.[^fn10] Singers would not memorize and recite but rather would use their learned method of expression to compose and perform simultaneously.[^fn11][^fn12] While all singers would follow the same story--there certainly would not be an *Iliad* in which Patroclus survived for example--each singer would have a unique song and each performance made by the same singer would have variations.[^fn13] Our idea of what can genuinely be considered the Iliad is allowed to be more fluid. There is not one original Iliad, but rather a variety of “Homeric multiforms” that are legitimate readings of the text. 

[^fn8]: Lord 1960: 3.

[^fn9]: Lord 1960: 4.

[^fn10]: Lord 1960: 5.

[^fn11]: Lord 1960: 5.

[^fn12]: Also see Nagy *Homeric Questions*: 17

[^fn13]: See Lord 1960: 100 for discussion of how a single singer’s performance changes over time.
Many legitimate multiforms have hitherto been disregarded. The scholia are our best source for multiforms, whether they directly offer them or quote sections of the *Iliad* or *Odyssey* that include them. Often in the latter case, we find that these multiforms have been “corrected” in the editions of Dindorf and Erbse to what our modern print editions of the *Iliad* and the *Odyssey* reflect. While these multiforms are a small percentage of the variety that was likely once present in the oral tradition of Homer, we can start to get a sense of how far ranging the oral tradition once was. The goal is not the impossible task of reconstructing “the work of generations of singers to that moment when some singer first sang a particular song.”[^fn14] The goal is to better understand how oral composition works, what that means for our interpretations of the Homeric texts, and how oral composition in performance factors into the interpretations of the ancient Homeric scholars of Alexandria.[^fn14]: Lord 1960: 100.The Homeric scholars of Alexandria play a key role in how I decided to conduct my analyses of the scholia. The major three, who will come up repeatedly in later chapters, especially [Chapter Seven](#Chapter-Seven:-The-Ancient-Homeric-Scholars), are Zenodotus, Aristophanes of Byzantium, and Aristarchus. Zenodotus and Aristophanes are said to have compiled mainly glosses of Homeric words, but Aristarchus most certainly wrote editions of both the *Iliad* and *Odyssey* as well as an extensive commentary.[^fn15]  Aristarchus, who dates from the second century BC, is associated with one of the important graphic features of the Venetus A: the critical signs.[^fn16] Aristarchus is said to have written his edition of the *Iliad* and his commentary on two different scrolls: one for the text of the *Iliad* and another for the text of the commentary.[^fn17] The *Iliad* and its commentary would be linked together by symbols denoting the type of comment Aristarchus had for the line.[^fn18] The critical signs become in large part how we are able to identify Aristarchaen material in the Venetus A manuscript, and then, subsequently, in other manuscripts by analyzing the similarities in content and phrasing. Other instances in the scholia, which I have noted, are those that cite more than one of the big three Alexandria scholars or an Alexandrian scholar and another authoritative source. These sources too have been little studied and often do not appear outside the scholia, making them inherently interesting for study. 

[^fn15]: Dickey 2007: 18.

[^fn16]: Bird, “Critical Signs” in *Recapturing a Homeric Legacy* 2009: 89.

[^fn17]: Bird, “Critical Signs” in *Recapturing a Homeric Legacy* 2009: 90.

[^fn18]: Bird, “Critical Signs” in *Recapturing a Homeric Legacy* 2009: 90; for further explanation on which sign indicate which type of comment see pages 92-94.The purpose of my investigations into the scholia is both to shed light on issues already discussed at length and to shed light on hitherto untouched issues. My time was unfortunately limited, so I was only able to investigate a select few of the scholia. Many scholia I read and translated, but did not include in subsequent chapters. Overall I translated 68 scholia of the Venetus A, which comprised about 18% of the total. In the Y.1.1 I translated a total of 26 scholia, which comprised 11% of the total. There was much I was not able to read in depth, which makes this project wonderfully open ended. In the following chapters are a survey of some of the scholia I was able to translate and interpret. I hope that they will be representative of the work I accomplished and reflect how necessary it is to continue this type of work through the rest of Book 8 and the *Iliad* as a whole.

