# Chapter Two: the Digital Editing Process: Goals and Procedures #

The immediate goal of my work has been to produce complete, digital, diplomatic editions of Book 8 in the Venetus A and the Escorial Υ.1.1 manuscripts. Most of my work has been accomplished in collaborative teams, partners without whom the accuracy of this project would be severely diminished. In addition to assuring accuracy, the collaborative element of this project is a key factor in producing complete digital editions of the scholia in one semester. By creating diplomatic editions, we seek to represent the visual evidence in the manuscripts as accurately as possible, without making any overly presumptive judgments. There are two main textual components to the manuscripts: the main text or poetry of the *Iliad*; and the text of the scholia. In addition, there are numerous graphic elements that must be accounted for in their own distinct way. Ultimately, every mark on the manuscript should be accounted for.One of the goals of the project is to encode the texts in such a way that makes them as useful as possible to those who wish to study them. We would like our editions to be used as research databases both for ourselves and for other scholars interested in the Homeric scholia. We view these editions as a platform from which we can begin a meaningful study of the *Iliad* and of the tradition of Homeric scholarship. We edit our editions in XML (Explicit Markup Language) as part of our digitization process. In XML we are able to use TEI (Text Encoding Initiative) markup to accurately reflect the nature of the manuscript. We have a limited set of features we note and mark up,  but this set of markup is also flexible to account for new features as we find them.[^fn19]  At risk of encoding too many features, as the capabilities of TEI markup are seemingly endless, we have resolved to use a very specific set of elements to avoid making our editions unusable.[^fn20]  

[^fn19]: More will be said about new markup in subsequent chapters.

[^fn20]: For example, current TEI P5 markup can allow a user to encode information about folio sides, placement, and even quire arrangement, using the locus element, which we find superfluous. A full list of all the features TEI P5 can encode for manuscripts can be found [here][Link6]. 

[Link6]: http://www.tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/MS.html. 

The most obvious of our markable features is the citation of named entities. For example the name Ὀδυσσεύς would be enclosed in personal name tags, looking like this: 
	
	<persName> Ὀδυσσεύς</persName>. 

This type of markup, however, does not do enough. As of 2011, we have given personal and place names their own unique identifiers within the Homer Multitext project. These unique identifiers are cite object URNs (uniform resource name). The advantage of URN notation is that it never changes and is an incredibly reliable way to cite information. In many way they are similar to the ISBNs that refer to books. Odysseus then looks something like this in our markup: 

	<persName n="urn:cite:hmt:pers.pers118"> Ὀδυσσεύς</persName>.

The number is an arbitrary identifier, meaning only that he happened to be the one-hundred and eighteenth name we added to our master list. This system of identification is used throughout the project, meaning that Odysseus is 

	urn:cite:hmt:pers.pers118 
	
through every single manuscript the project works on. The advantage of this identification system means that we can generate a list of every occurrence of a particular individual or place in any and all editions of text. Other types of markup we include attempt to accurately reflect the physical text. In the main text and in the scholia, we include markup for abbreviations and issues of clarity. We also include markup for quotations within the scholia that will reference other works using URN notation, in this case canonical text citations. For instance the URN used to refers to the *Iliad* in general looks like this: 

	urn:cts:greekLit:tlg0012.tlg001.Another branch of TEI editing aims to more accurately portray the physical presentation of the manuscript. For example, if you were to look at manuscript of the *Iliad* compared with our modern print editions, even an advanced student of Greek would have a difficult time deciphering the abbreviations, letter forms, and ligatures present in the text. One of the initiatives of the Homer Multitext project has been to create paleographic guides to assist in the process of reading Greek manuscripts. LINK TO GUIDES. Paleographic features tend to break down into two different categories. One category is features that are clear and unambiguous. For instance this mark HERE is always the abbreviation for ου. This paleographic feature does not get any special markup because it is unambiguous. However there are some paleographic features that are ambiguous and therefore require markup. For example a common word like θεὸς is often abbreviated as merely θ͠ς. Other common Greek words such as ἄνθρωπος, οὐρανός, μήτηρ, and πάτηρ are similarly abbreviated by omitting the middle of the word. In these cases they are abbreviated with the same mark in the same way. The mark does not always indicate the same letters being abbreviated and therefore the symbol is ambiguous. In cases like these we include markup that indicates the abbreviation, notes what the likely expansion is, and offers the reader the choice of the two. Other types of markup in the text generally have to do with issues of clarity. Text on deteriorating pages that cannot be completely distinguished is marked as unclear, for example. Ultimately we wish to produce editions that accurately reflect the manuscripts, their texts, and their features.Our standard for editing is a team-oriented process. There are always at least two, if not three, people looking at the folio as it is being edited. The process can be broken down into three general steps steps: 1) Creating an image index of the textual feature, main Iliadic text and scholia text, 2) Editing the texts in a digital edition, and 3) Verifying the results.1) To create an image inventory we begin by isolating a region of interest on the page that corresponds to each Iliadic line and each scholion. Doing so allows us to create a unique reference that is citable as visual evidence. When we index an image, we select a portion of the larger image on each page and designate it as the part of the manuscript that contains an individual scholion. In order to inventory an image, we use an Image Citation Tool designed by the Homer Multitext project team that allows us to identify a portion of an image and gives us a citation for that region of interest in URN notation.[^fn21]  Each Iliadic line uses the canonical references assigned by Friedrich Wolf. Each scholion image is assigned its own unique URN identifier by the editorial teams. Everything associated with the scholion is then referenced by this identifier.[^fn22]  [^fn21]: You can see the citation tool in action on folio 12r of the Venetus A [here][Link4]. References for different folios and manuscripts can be supplied and the sizes of the page can be altered for viewer preferences.
	
[Link4]: http://www.homermultitext.org/hmt-digital/ict.html?urn=urn:cite:hmt:vaimg.VA012RN-0013[^fn22]: All scholia in this thesis will be cited by their unique URN references.2) The main text is edited in two stages. First a team of two or three reads through the text, noting discrepancies on a hard copy. Then the team starts from the top in the XML edition, with both the manuscript and the hard copy edit as a reference. The most efficient way we have found to edit the scholia to date is to compare with the text of the Erbse edition, making alterations as necessary, much as we do for the main text of the *Iliad*. When we produce our digital editions of the scholia they are automatically linked to their respective images by matching unique identifiers. This makes our editions instantly verifiable by other members of the Multitext project and by anyone else who may subsequently use our digital editions.[^fn23]

[^fn23]: A succinct explanation of the philosophy behind such a process of verification can be found in Borgman 2007: 70-71.  3) The next step in the process is the most difficult and continually growing aspect of the project: verification. As of summer 2014, there are now several tests in place to review and verify work. The first of these tests generates a colored image overlay like the one you see [here][Link5]. From this image overlay, we are able to visually verify that everything has been properly indexed in the right category and that there aren't any blocks of text that were accidentally missed. The editions have proven more challenging to verify, but we are now able to run our editions through a test that verifies aspects of markup and parses every Greek word. This process identifies where we have words not recognized in our standard LSJ Greek dictionary and allows us to find these “failures” by their URN citation. Often we run into simple issues where the scribe has not included an accent or breathing mark in the appropriate place. These we consider genuine Byzantine orthographic variants and have begun to create lists of orthographic variants that the verification tool then uses. Other issues include scribal mistakes, which include erroneous breathings, accents, spellings, etc. These we wrap in markup to indicate that they are genuine errors on the page. Finally, we have begun to discover that there are words that do not exist in the LSJ but are, in fact, previously unattested Greek words. One such word that the automation tool has revealed is ταρταρίζειν, which we can reasonably suppose from its context in the scholion means something along the lines of “to be in Tartarus.” ταρταρίζειν has been quite a fascinating find as it appears in both the Venetus A and Y.1.1 scholia.[^fn24]  The development of our verification process is, as stated above, ongoing, but the more tools we develop to test our results, the more information we have uncovered about these manuscripts.

[Link5]: http://www.homermultitext.org/hmt-digital/indices?urn=urn%3Acite%3Ahmt%3Avaimg.VA012RN-0013

[^fn24]: For more on these scholia see [Chapter Three: Scholia on Mythological Geography](#Chapter-Three:-Scholia-on-Mythological-Geography).The final aspect of the editing process is to account for all the features of the manuscripts that cannot be properly expressed in our editions of the text and the scholia. Features in Book 8 alone have required us to rethink how we ought to account for visual features, and some of these will be discussed in later chapters. Other features we have uncovered in both manuscripts include: quire arrangements, epic simile numbers, critical signs, diagrams, drawings, and some features we have yet to explain. Especially for the latter category, we have collected image inventories and catalogued these features for further study. Ultimately we seek to leave no aspect of a manuscript unpublished. Having the digital photography continuously at our disposal has allowed us to spend more time with features besides the main text and scholia.