# Conclusions #

A project like this one is monumental to say the least and it is of course thanks to many people that I was able to accomplish as much as I did. Still, there is much left to be investigated. While I was able to start forming conclusions about scribal practices and ancient Homeric scholarship, it is glaringly obvious that many of the issues I investigated require further exploration. For example, the first person scholia should be examined more thoroughly in Book 8 as we refine the tools of our automated searches. The automated verification system is currently available only for the Venetus A scholia and searches for specific words and forms must be conducted manually, subject to human error. Because of the narrow scope of my project, I only looked at scholia on Iliad 8. The first person scholia should be examined across the other books of the Iliad, across more than two manuscripts, across other Homeric texts, and ideally across the scholia on other works and authors. The analysis I conducted with the first person scholia can only be substantiated by examining a broader range of case studies.	
On the subject of the automation tools: as I began to conduct research using the verification tools, I became familiar with their limits and what would make them more useful in the future. At the time of this writing, the automated verification system is designed only for the Venetus A scholia, and at first only the main scholia of the Venetus A. What I was able to search for often changed on a weekly basis as this system was being refined. I conducted much of the search process manually. With continued refining, eventually the automated verification tool can be used for manuscripts besides the Venetus A and can be used to define searches morphologically and topically. One of my interests I did not get to explore as much as I would have liked is scholia that discuss how a line or lines should sound in performance. There are several scholia that talk about accentation and pronunciation, but they are incredibly difficult to find without translating every scholion. The scholia would be easier to identify if it was possible to search for specified vocabulary entries.	
Another of my ongoing projects is to assemble technical terms. There are often words in the scholia that have a particular technical sense that is not expressed in the LSJ entry if it appears in the LSJ at all. Greek technical vocabulary, as can be seen by some of the translations I have rendered in the above chapters, can be as specific as a word that means “put an acute accent on the penultimate syllable of a word” in question. My most useful resource for decoding these terms is the glossary of grammatical vocabulary in Eleanor Dickey’s Ancient Greek Scholarship.  As Dickey says herself, this is not a complete dictionary. In the last year, the Homer Multitext project has started to assemble its own glossary of grammatical terms and cite them with examples in the scholia. Citations are useful because often the meaning of a term is only made clear through its context. For example, if we look at Dickey’s entry for the verb βαρύνω it reads: “(of letters or syllables) to pronounce without an accent, mark with a grave accent; (of words) pronounce without an accent on the final syllable, mark the final syllable with a grave accent, (mid.) have no accent on the final syllable (in practice, normally restricted to recessive accentation).”  While Dickey’s definition is thorough and even offers distinctions when talking about different topics, in practice, it is not so easy to pick the correct definition for translation. The word came up frequently as I started initial investigations into scholia about how the poetry should sound. In that instance, there is quite a bit of difference between an accent that is grave and no accent at all. With a citation of an example scholion, users of the HMT glossary would not only be given definitions in their grammatical sense but also within their respective contexts. It then becomes possible to analyze the situations in which a certain definition is used to enable us to translate them with more ease and more accuracy. This is a project that remains ongoing beyond the work I have accomplished on Iliad 8.	
Another issue made apparent by the automated verification tools is the presence of words that simply do not exist in the LSJ but otherwise appear to be legitimate Greek words. While I was unable to run an automated verification for the Y.1.1, anecdotal evidence has revealed a similar state of affairs. It would be foolish to assume that unattested words do not occur in other books of the Iliad, in other manuscripts of the Iliad, or in manuscripts of other works. Already these discoveries have the potential to form a supplement to the LSJ and a more thorough search for such words ought to be conducted.	
As I edited the main text of the Iliad in the Venetus A, I began to notice curved lines appearing under length words that looked as if they were long compounds.  By chance, I happened to edit and translate one scholion that discussed on these compounds on line 8.527. The scholion reads:κήρεσσι φορήτουςσυνθέτως ἀνέγνω ὁ Ἀρίσταρχος καὶ οἱ πλείους ἴσως δὲ ἐπεὶ ἀναλύει αὐτὸ "οὒς κῆρες φορέουσιν" (Il. 8.528) ἔθος γὰρ αὐτῷ πολλάκις τὰ σύνθετα ἀναλύειν. οὐδέποτε δὲ δοτικῇ ἐπεκτεταμένη, κατ αρχὴν συντέθειται οἶον πᾶσι καὶ πάντεσσι· "πασιμέλουσα" (Od. 12.70), οὐχὶ παρα τὴν πάντεσσι ἡ σύνθεσις "Ναυσικάα" "Ναυσίθοος", "ἐγχεσίμοροι" "τειχεσιπλήτης". κατ αρχὴν δὲ προσέθηκα, διὰ τὸ παρ'  Ἐπιχάρμῳ  κατα τέλος συντεθειμένον "γυναικ’ ἄνδρεσσι ποθεινοί"· εἴπερ οὖν τοῦτο ἀληθὲς. δηλονότι παράλογον, τὸ "κηρεσσιφορήτους" κατα σύνθεσιν ἀναγνωστέον, ἀλλ ὅμως ἐπεκράτησεν ἡ Ἀριστάρχειος δι ὃν εἴπομεν λόγον ⁑“Urged on the Fates:Aristarchus read it well as a compound, and the majority likewise also when he resolves it into its elements it: "οὒς κῆρες φορέουσιν" (Il. 8.528). Because it is customary for him to resolve the compound often. But never lengthening out the syllable in the dative, at the beginning it is compounded like “πασι” and “πάντεσσι” in "παειμέλουσα" (Od. 12.70).  The compound is not only derived from from “πάντεσσι,” [for example] "Ναυσικάα" "Ναυσίθοος", "ἐγχεσίμοροι" "τειχεσιπλήτης." I placed it at the beginning, according to the [argument] from Epicharmos, and I compound it at the end like "γυναικ’ ἄνδρεσσι ποθεινοί." Indeed if that is true it is clear that it is contrary to the rule. The “κηρεσσιφορήτους” must be read as a compound, but nevertheless the Aristarchean edition is the authority according which logic we say it.” The compound in question in this scholion is marked with one of these curved, connecting lines. One of the questions I would like to answer, but did not have the time to investigate was, whether other words marked with these connecting lines have scholia that discuss their compound nature.	
In Chapter One, I described by task in investigating the scholia as twofold. I wanted to investigate issues that have plagued scholarship for quite some time and I wanted to investigate new issues as revealed by the scholia of Iliad 8. I alluded briefly above to the controversial chariot scene and its relation to the other tale of the epic cycle, the Aithiopis. Many modern scholars have cited the scholia as a source for much of their discussion and due to time constraints I was not able to look into the issue fully. A brief cursory look through the scholia of both manuscripts yielded little results on the issue. In fact, the one scholion I did find in the Y.1.1 justified the necessity of the scene. The scholion appears on line 8.114 and reads:ἐν σχήματι ἐδήλωσε τὸ δοκοῦν παραλελεῖφθαι· οὐ γὰρ εἴρηκεν ἀνωτέρω ποῖοι  ἦσαν οἱ θεράποντες· φασὶ δὲ τὸν Σθένελον ἀπὸ τοῦ τείχους κατενεχθέντα τρωθῆναι τὸ σκέλος δια τοῦτο οὐ πολεμεῖ ἀλλ’ ἡνιοχεῖ Διομήδει⁑In the line he has shown that is expected that he be left behind. For he has not said previously/above where the charioteers were. They say that Sthenelos having been brought down from the walls was wounded with respect to his leg and because of this he did not fight but rather held the reins for Diomedes.  The necessities of time required me to turn my investigations to more pressing issues that could be researched with less strenuous methods and would contribute more to scholarly pursuits.	
I can say with no reservations that my work merely scratched the surface of what can be done in researching the Homeric scholia. I attempted to provide a survey of the kinds of issues that can be investigated and what they can reveal about ancient Homeric scholarship. Several of the topics I did discuss, as I have mentioned above, merit further investigation, and many topics I have alluded to deserve investigation in the future. It is my hope that my work can serve as a launching point for how to conduct research like this and what sort of inquires can be made. It is my plan to continue working further with Iliad 8 after this thesis and to expand my investigations as far as I reasonably can.