# Chapter Seven: The Ancient Homeric Scholars #

The scholia that cite the ancient Homeric scholars are fruitful for discussion, not only because studying them reveals some of the intricacies of relationships between the scholars and their texts but also reveals aspects of how their work was handed down to us. By systematically analyzing the content of these scholia I was able to formulate hypotheses about how the work of the ancient scholars is presented. In particular, as I began to pull references to multiple Alexandrian scholars, I noticed that they were not always referenced in the nominative singular. In this chapter, I would like to investigate some of the methods by which the scholia refer to the Alexandrian scholars. Many modern scholars have weighed in on the topic and have offered suggestions, some more forcefully than others, as to how we should handle these references and what we should conclude about the Alexandrian scholars and their works. I will offer some new suggestions on the issue.	
The first type of these references to the Alexandria scholars has been fairly authoritatively handled by Eleanor Dickey in Ancient Greek Scholarship. Often the scholia refer to an ancient scholar in the accusative singular, preceded by οἱ περὶ. For example, see this scholion of the Venetus A on line 8.290:οἱ περὶ Ζηνόδοτον καὶ Αριστοφανη "ἵππω": Zenodotus and Aristophanes and those who agree with them [write] ἵππω. [urn1][urn1]

[urn1]: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msAim.hmt:8.200Dickey writes that: “περί commonly has an inclusive use when preceded by a form of οἱ, so that οἱ περὶ Ζηνόδοτον (literally “those around Zenodotus,” i.e Zenodotus’ followers) means ‘Zenodotus and his followers.’”[^fn1] When we see scholia that use περί like this, we can begin to piece together a picture of not just Aristophanes coming after Zenodotus and agreeing with his choices, but subsequent scholars who were using the works of both authors to write their commentaries.
	
[^fn1]: Dickey 2007: 119. 	
Another plural that is perhaps less definitively understood, appears as αἱ and the genitive form of a scholar’s name (e.g. αἱ Ἀριστάρχου or αἱ Ζηνοδότου). The question is: what does αἱ refer to? West, writing under the assumption that we should attribute scholia using this formula to Didymus, states that Aristarchus published two separate editions (ἔκδοσεις) of the *Iliad*.[^fn2] West’s theory, however, only accounts for Aristarchus, not other ancient scholars who also appear with αἱ, and is furthermore predicated on the assumption that the scholia he analyzes are attributable to Didymus, whom the end of book subscriptions in the Venetus A indicate as writing about the διόρθωσις of Aristarchus.[^fn3] However, Gregory Nagy urges caution in how we should interpret the idea of an edition.[^fn4]  He further outlines the historical view of Aristarchus’s works, based on the combined works of Pfeiffer and Janko.[^fn5] This interpretation of Aristarchus’s work is that Aristarchus first wrote an edition (ἔκδοσεις) of Homer and a commentary (ὑπόμνημα) based on the edition of his predecessor, Aristophanes of Byzantium, and then wrote a separate edition and commentary thereafter.[^fn6] According to West’s theory, the nominative plural aἱ refers to these two distinct editions and not the commentaries, but we ought to keep in mind that the evidence for this theory is the scholia themselves and the scholia are not explicit. We should also note that the nominative plural itself does not imply specifically two, but only more than one of something. We must also keep in mind that the scholarly discussion I have outlined pertains only to the work of Aristarchus and does not consider the other ancient scholars similarly referenced with the nominative plural feminine article.

[^fn2]: West, Studies in the Text and Transmission of the Iliad. 2003: 61-62.[^fn3]: See Chapter One above.	

[^fn4]: Nagy Poetry as Performance: 115-116.

[^fn5]: Nagy Poetry as Performance: 115; also see footnote 40.

[^fn6]: Nagy Poetry as Performance: 115; Pfeiffer 1968: 215.

I propose another option for interpretation: that the plural form of the definite article does not refer to multiple editions, since the word for edition or text is omitted, but based on the content of the scholia, could refer to the text and the commentary written by each ancient scholar. This interpretation does present some problems because the article always appears in the feminine, meaning the omitted word ought to be feminine and plural. The word for commentary, ὑπόμνημα, is neuter, and therefore unlikely to be intended by αἱ. As we have seen with a phrase like οἱ περὶ Ζηνόδοτον, Greek can often express an inclusive idea without that being the literal translation. As Nagy cautions, ἔκδοσεις might not refer specifically to an edition by our modern interpretation, rather it might refer to texts of the ancient scholars in a broader sense or, as Nagy suggests, a text of a more critical nature.[^fn7] Nagy discusses the rather complicated relationship between an ἔκδοσεις and a διόρθωσις.[^fn8] Both terms we can generally define as a text or an edition, but διόρθωσις would appear to have a stricter sense of being a text that seeks some sort of authority or correctness.[^fn9] Both terms are also feminine and therefore could be implied by the feminine plural article. Nagy outlines this possibility somewhat explicitly, though points out, as many other scholars do, that we have little idea of how “critical” we could consider a διόρθωσις.[^fn10] It is unlikely that a διόρθωσις would be anything like our modern sense of a critical edition. The root meaning of the word would suggest some measure of selectivity and revision in the production of the text, but what that entailed to an Alexandrian scholar is unclear to us. We may also want to consider the physical artifacts written by the Alexandrian scholars. They wrote their editions before the codex was widely used. Therefore they wrote their editions of the *Iliad* on one scroll and their commentaries on another, hence creating two separate artifacts. To play it on the conservative side, I have chosen to translate αἱ as “the texts.” When we look at the wording of the scholia, we begin to see a clear pattern that two different artifacts must be referred to. For example on line 8.213, a scholion reads:[^fn7]: Nagy Poetry as Performance: 115-116.
	
[^fn8]: Nagy Poetry as Performance: 115-116.
	
[^fn9]: See Pfeiffer 1968: 216.
	
[^fn10]: Nagy Poetry as Performance: 115-116. See also Eleanor Dickey’s definition for διόρθωσις in Dickey 2007: 232. Also see Pfeiffer’s discussion of Zenodotus, Aristarchus, and the verb διορθοῦν in Tzetzes in Pfeiffer 1968: 105-107, 110-111.τῶν δ' ὅσον ἐκ νηῶν ἀπο πύργου τάφρος ἔεργε:διχῶς αἱ Ἀριστάρχου· "ἔεργε" καὶ "ἔρυκε".[^fn11]  “The trench encloses the space all the way from the ships to the tower:The texts of Aristarchus have it two ways: "ἔεργε" and "ἔρυκε."”[urn2][urn2]  

[^fn11]: The scholia continues on from here, but for the sake of this point, the remaining comments are unnecessary.[urn2]: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA:8.152The main text in the Venetus A reads ἔεργε, indicating a preference by the Venetus A scribe or his source for one version over the other. It is entirely possible that ἔεργε is a reading that Aristarchus included in his edition of the text and ἔρυκε is another reading he includes in his commentary. The scholion does not give any evidence for which form might be right or a later emendation by Aristarchus from one edition of the *Iliad* to another. Therefore I cannot yet conclude that the two readings come from two different editions Aristarchus produced.	
We should also consider, before we get too attached to the idea that we should interpret the feminine plural article as evidence that Aristarchus wrote two separate editions, that the nominative plural feminine article appears with names besides Aristarchus. In the *Iliad* 8 scholia alone, we also see the αἱ with the names of Herodian and Aristophanes. I would venture to predict that we would find αἱ with the names of other scholars if we expanded the investigation beyond *Iliad* 8. Future inquiries aside, the evidence cannot be overlooked. Before we make assumptions on only the text of Aristarchus, we must consider that we have the same evidence appearing with Herodian and Aristophanes of Byzantium. It seems a serious assumption to claim that these authors also wrote multiple editions. 	
In the presence of αἱ with names besides that of Aristarchus, it becomes increasingly apparent that we ought not rely wholly on what we might be able to ascertain from what might be the text of Didymus. In a scholion on line 8.296, we find the genitive singular of Herodian, after αἱ Ἀριστάρχου. Here I made my translation of the text based on two assumptions. One, that the punctuation between δεδεγμένος and Ἡρῳδιανοῦ, as you will see below, indicated a distinction between two separate sentences, and two, that the parallel of Ἀριστάρχου and Ἡρῳδιανοῦ permits us to supply αἱ with Ἡρῳδιανοῦ. I have transcribed this scholion as follows:ἐκ τοῦ δὴ τόξοισι δεδεγμένος:οὕτως αἱ Ἀριστάρχου διὰ τοῦ "γ" "δεδεγμένος"· Ἡρῳδιανοῦ διὰ τοῦ "χ" "δεδεχμένος". καί φασὶ Διογένης. ἐν τοῖς ὑπομνήμασι. ὅτι “εἰρωνευόμενος” λεγει οἷον "δεξιούμενος τοῖς τόξοις"· τὸ γὰρ δεδέχεσθαι δεξιοῦσθαι ἐστιν οὐκ αχαρις ἡ ἐξήγησις ⁑“From that moment waiting with bows:Thus the texts of Aristarchus have δεδεγμένος with a gamma. The texts of Herodian have “δεδεχμένος” with a chi. And Diogenes says in the commentaries, that he writes “εἰρωνευόμενος” something like “δεξιούμενος τοῖς τόξοις.” Because to wait/expect is to welcome not without charm or explanation.”[urn3][urn3]

[urn3]: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA:8.199 I find it unlikely that the plural refers to a single text of Aristarchus and a single text of Herodian because there is no conjunction and if it was a single text from each scholar, it would make more sense if both scholars were cited in the nominative singular with an active verb. Therefore we are most likely considering more than one artifact from each scholar. If we were only meant to understand one artifact from Herodian, it seems more likely that the scholiast would have provided the singular ἡ with his name. Notably the formulation of citation changes when the scholion references Diogenes and refers specifically to his commentaries.[^fn12] The scholion specifically uses the phrase ἐν τοῖς ὑπομνήμασι to refer to Diogenes’s commentaries. It seems more than likely that the scholiast is choosing to distinguish here to what sort of work he refers. Therefore it is likely that the plural article refers to some type of work that is not merely a ὑπόμνημα, but something else. I think it is more probable that the αἱ is not referring to separate editions of Aristarchus or Herodian, but both to their editions and to their respective commentaries or works that offer variant readings. If there were two different editions of a scholar’s text, it would make the most sense to note that there are two when they are in disagreement, but if that were the case, why would the scholion refer to two editions if they agree? It would make more sense if the scholiast refers to the readings of Aristarchus and Herodian by citing the scholars in the nominative. Therefore there must be some other reason multiple texts are being noted. I think it is the case that the scholion wants to draw the reader’s attention to the idea that both the text and a scholarly commentary note these readings. Such a repetition seems less unusual given the many scholia that often discuss the correctness of a reading that is already present in the text in both the Venetus A and the Upsilon 1.1.

[^fn12]: This Diogenes is likely Diogenes of Tarsus, who is said to have made inquiries into poetry, likely Homeric poetry, according to Diogenes Laertius X.118.	
The scholia of *Iliad* 8 offer a plethora of examples, but at risk of discussing the issue ad nauseam, I will detail only one more scholion. Discussing the unusual use of βέλος to indicate not the weapon but the wound itself in line 8.513, the scholion reads:‡ἀλλ' ὥς τις τούτον[^fn13] γε βέλοςὅτι "βέλος" εἴρηκε τὸ τρᾶμα ὁμωνύμως τῷ τιτρώσκοντι. αἱ Ἀριστοφάνους "πέσσοι"·  Παρμενίσκος δὲ ἐν τῷ α Πρὸς Κράτητα[^fn14]  ὡς Ἀριστάρχειον γραφὴν προφέρεται, "ἀλλ ὥς τις κείνων γε"⁑

[^fn13]: The lemma has τούτον, but the line in the Venetus A reads τούτων. The difference in readings is likely explained by differences in Byzantine orthography, that often exchanges omicrons for omegas and vice versa.

[^fn14]: Erbse cites fr. 2 Br.“But so that some missile:The sign is there because he said the weapon to indicate the wound, it being a homonym for wounding. The texts of Aristophanes have πέσσοι. And Parmeniscus[^fn15] in Book One of Regarding Dominance, like the Aristarchean writing, has "ἀλλ ὥς τις κείνων γε."”[urn4][urn4] [^fn15]: Parmeniscus appears to be a little known grammarian and commentator who is only preserved in the scholia of Homer and a few other authors.

[urn4]: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA.hmt:8.321Here again we see a scholar besides Aristarchus appearing with the feminine plural article to offer a variant reading of the line. Also cited are a work by Parmeniscus and the vague “Aristarchean writing.” It is worth pondering that γραφή is also a feminine noun, equally a possibility for the noun understood by the feminine article. However, the singular here would imply that there is only one possibility for the Aristarchean writing, making the theory of two separate editions unlikely because the reader would not know which edition to reference from this scholion. If the γραφή is just the text or the commentary, or even the collective of the two, the reader would have little trouble distinguishing the source. However, we need to see more example to determine what exactly is meant by γραφή and also why it is referred to by the adjectival form of Aristarchus's name rather than the genitive singular, if such a difference is a meaningful distinction. Returning to the issue of Aristophanes’s texts as mentioned in this scholion, we can conclude that Aristophanes wrote more than one text from which the scholiast could draw. Especially given that the line requires some explanations of logic and vocabulary, it is more than likely that Aristophanes would have written some sort of commentary for this line. If indeed he did then we can ponder the possibility that the plural article indicates that in the process of studying the texts, the Alexandrian scholars and those who followed them would consult both editions of the text and their commentaries and allude to both in their explanations of multiforms. Such dual consultation is also evident in the presence of critical signs next to the main text of the Venetus A (and occasionally a scholion) and the explicit reference to critical signs in the text of some scholia.	
Another variation of this type of reference appears as the singular article ἡ with the genitive singular of a scholar. I would propose that in the singular, the scholiast refers either to just the poetic text or some sort of critical investigations of the text. One example of this usage can be found on line 8.304 of the Venetus A. I have transcribed the scholion as follows:Ἀρίσταρχος "Αἱσύμνηθεν" καὶ ἡ Ζηνοδοτου καὶ ἡ Ἀριστοφανους“Aristarchus writes: “Αἱσύμνηθεν” as does the text of Zenodotus and the text of Aristophanes.”[urn5][urn5][^fn17]

[urn5]: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msAim:8.213  

[^fn17]: The scholion seems to be saying that the contracted form, which is considered the superior form, never appears in the text of Homer. This argument would make sense as contracted forms originated long after the beginning of the epic tradition.In the Venetus A, the word appears without breathings as Αισύμηνθεν and in the Y.1.1 it appears with a smooth breathing as Αἰσύμνηθεν. One of the more problematic references to works of Aristarchus appears on line 8.405 of the Venetus A. The scholion reads:ἕλκε ἀπαλθήσεσθονἐν τῇ ἑτέρα τῶν Ἀριστάρχου "ἕλκε ἀπαλθήσονται" καὶ μήποτε κρείττων τὰ ἕλκη ἀπαλθήσονται ⁑“They shall thoroughly heal the wounds:In the other [text] of Aristarchus it is "ἕλκε ἀπαλθήσονται" and there never is the superior form: "ἕλκη ἀπαλθήσονται."”[urn6][urn6]

[urn6]: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA:8.259  It is unclear what exactly is meant by ἑτέρα. What is this “other thing” of Aristarchus? This reference could perhaps support West’s hypothesis that Aristarchus wrote two editions of the *Iliad* and the later one is being referred to here. If it is not another edition of the *Iliad* text, then what is it? I suggest that it could be referring to another scroll, i.e. the scroll that contains Aristarchus’s commentary on the *Iliad*, not his text. If we apply the idea that ἑτέρα refers to an object written chronologically later, we might be able to infer that the general practice of writing a two scrolled edition and commentary was a sequential process, meaning that first the text edition was written and then the commentary.	
Other references to the Alexandrian scholars are fairly clear. Occasionally they are used with prepositions like ἐν, πρὸς, and παρὰ. ἐν and πρὸς seem to be used when referring to specific readings in texts. For example, a scholion on line 8.166 of the Venetus A reads:‡ εν τῇ Ζηνοδοτου "ποτμον ἐφήσω"⁑ “In the text of Zendotos [it is] "ποτμον ἐφήσω."”[urn7][urn7]

[urn7]: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msAint:8.128 A scholion using πρός on line 8.56 reads:παυρότεροι:ὅτι ἐλάσσους ἀεὶ τοὺς Τρῶας συν τοῖς ἐπικούροις λέγει ἡ δε ἀναφορὰ πρὸς ἐκεῖνα τὰ ἀθετούμενα, "πολλεων ἐκ πολίων ἐγχέσπαλοι ἄνδρες" (Il. 2.131)· καὶ πρὸς Ζηνόδοτον γράφοντα,· "μυρία δ' ἐν πεδίω" [^fn18]⁑[^fn18]: Erbse recommends comparing to Iliad 8.562“SmallerThe sign is there because he [the poet] always says the Trojans with their allies are a smaller group. And the repetition with respect to those athetized lines, for example "πολλεων ἐκ πολίων ἐχξέσπαλοι ἄνδρες" (Il. 2.131) as opposed to the written work of Zenodotus "μυρία δ’ ἐν πεδίω".”[urn8][urn8]

[urn8]: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA:8.47 πρός we could more specifically translate as “as opposed to” with the implication of a disagreement. Both ἐν and πρός in these scholia appear with quoted alternatives for the text. We also see Zenodotus in the accusative with the participle γράγοντα, seemingly a variation on the γράφην Ἀριστάρχου. 

On the other hand, παρὰ seems be used when talking about athetization and lines that do not exist in some editions of the text. For example on line 8.284 of the Venetus A, a scholion reads: καί σε νόθον περ ἑόντα:παρα Ζηνοδότω, οὐδε ἢν· ἠθέτητο δὲ καὶ παρα Ἀριστοφάνει ὅτι ἄκαιρος ἡ γενεαλογία καὶ οὐκ έχουσα προτροπὴν ἀλλα τοῦναντίον ὀνειδισμὸν καὶ ἀποτροπήν ⁑“And indeed you being a bastard:In Zenodotus,[^fn19] the line was not there. And it was athetized in Aristophanes because the family history is inappropriate and does not suit an exhortation but rather is a reproach and a dissuasion [from action].”[urn9][urn9]  

[^fn19]: According to the LSJ παρὰ with the dative can be used in the technical sense to mean “in” when introducing a quotation or perhaps in this case referring to a specific point in a text since the scholia refer to athetization rather than quoted lines.

[urn9]: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA:8.196The scholion is discussing the controversial point in the narrative where Agamemnon is exhorting the other Greeks, but notably and to the modern and some ancient ears inappropriately, pointing out that Teucer is the illegitimate son of Telamon. In this scholion, παρὰ is used to refer to the editions of the main text produced by both Zenodotus and Aristophanes and discuss their approach to dealing with the line. However, instead of referring to a physical object with an article or noun, the dative singular of the scholar's name stands in for their works.	
We have a similar occurrence on line 8.557 of the Venetus A, where the scholion reads:ἔκ τ' ἔφανεν πᾶσαι:ἀθετεῖται ὅτι οἰκειότερον ἔχει κατὰ τὴν Πατρόκλου ἐπιφάνειαν·[^fn20] καὶ ὁ ἑξῆς[^fn21] δὲ συναθετεῖται αὐτῷ ἐκεῖ γὰρ αἰφνίδιον βούλεται ἐπίλαμψιν παραστῆσαι αἰφνιδίως Πατρόκλου ἐπιφανέντος· ἐνταῦθα δὲ παρατεταμένην νηνεμίην κατ' εὐδίαν· οὐκ εφέροντο δὲ οὐδὲ παρα Ζηνοδότῳ. ἠθέτει δὲ καὶ Ἀριστοφάνης ⁑

[^fn20]: Erbse cites Iliad 16.299 as fruitful for comparison.

[^fn21]: Erbse claims the line referred to is Iliad 16.300.“From which everything is seen:The line is athetized because it is rather similar to the looking down on Patroclus. And what follows is athetized along with it because he wishes to stand there suddenly illuminated, so that Patroclus may be viewed suddenly. But there the stillness is stretched out for tranquility. It is not transmitted in Zenodotus. And Aristophanes also athetized it.”[urn10][urn10]

[urn10]: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA:8.346 Here too, we find the reference to Zenodotus leaving out a line with the preposition παρὰ. We have yet another case again on line 8.371 of the Venetus A, which reads:ουδὲ παρὰ Ζηνοδότω ῆσαν ⁑ “The lines were not in Zenodotus.”[urn11][urn11]

[urn11]: urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA:8.246 On the topic of athetization, it has been fairly well established that the critical signs present in the Venetus A harken back to the critical signs of Aristarchus, who we know marked lines for athetization with a horizontal bar called an obelus.[^fn22] As we can see from the last three scholia mentioned above, different scholars had different methods of dealing with problematic lines. Zenodotus frequently prefers to omit problematic lines as evidenced by the above scholia. Aristophanes, we can see, has some method of marking lines for athetization. Whether he has a system of critical signs that are the same as Aristarchus’ or similar is unknown. However, we can start to draw conclusions about the practices of these ancient scholars as individuals and how they dealt with problems in the text.

[^fn22]: Bird, “Critical Signs” in Recapturing Homeric Legacy 2009: 92.	
Other issues with the Alexandrian scholars begin to get at the fundamental questions we have about the texts they produced and what they entailed. It is a difficult issue because our evidence for their works comes largely from the scholia themselves. The scholia are rarely explicit and much is left to the interpretation of the reader and the individual creativity of the scholar producing solutions. We must also be careful not to assume that the scribes responsible for the scholiastic tradition were consistent in how they referred to ancient scholarly texts. Further systematic analysis of these instances will hopefully yield meaningful results on this front. The feminine plural article and what we ought to supply as a noun has been debated by scholars for decades. The more we begin to understand about the practices of the Alexandrian scholars, through close study of references to them, the closer we can get to determining what is implied by αἱ and the closer we can get to answer the broader questions of how critical were their critical editions and how close the ancient sense of an edition is to our modern sense of an edition. As the digital age redefines our notion of a text, we are also better able to understand the ancient and medieval notions of text.