# The Works of Ancient Scholars #

## On Editions ##

One ambiguity of reference to the works of the ancient Homeric scholars is the use of the feminine article, in particular the use of the plural feminine article in conjunction with the genitive singular of the scholar's name. The most notable of these is Aristarchus, who is widely talked about by Nagy, West, and their predecessors. West writes that we should attribute scholia using this fomula to Didymus and uses the plural as evidence that  Aristarchus published two separate editions (ἔκδοσεις) of the *Iliad*.[^fn1] West’s theory, however, only accounts for Aristarchus, not other ancient scholars who also appear with αἱ, and is furthermore predicated on the assumption that the scholia he analyzes are attributable to Didymus, whom the end of book subscriptions in the Venetus A--see for example the first such subscription to Book One, <code concordion:set="#urn">urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msAsub:1</code>--indicate as writing about the <strong concordion:assertEquals="getPhrase(#urn)">διόρθωσις</strong> of Aristarchus. However, Nagy urges caution in how we should interpret the idea of an edition.[^fn2] We cannot assume that Aristarchus was writing his edition of the *Iliad* with any of our modern notions of textual criticism although we can attribute the distant origin of our notions to the larger movement of the Alexandrian scholars. The historical view of Aristarchus’s works, based on the combined works of Pfeiffer and Janko, is that Aristarchus first wrote an edition (ἔκδοσεις) of Homer and a commentary (ὑπόμνημα) based on the edition of his predecessor, Aristophanes of Byzantium, and then wrote a separate edition and commentary thereafter.[^fn3] Nagy discusses the rather complicated relationship between an ἔκδοσεις and a διόρθωσις.[^fn4] Both terms we can generally define as a text or an edition, but διόρθωσις would appear to have a stricter sense of being a text that seeks some sort of authority or correctness.[^fn5] Both terms are also feminine and therefore could be implied by the feminine plural article. Nagy outlines this possibility somewhat explicitly, though points out, as many other scholars do, that we have little idea of how “critical” we could consider a διόρθωσις.[^fn6] It is unlikely that a διόρθωσις would be anything like our modern sense of a critical edition. The root meaning of the word would suggest some measure of selectivity and revision in the production of the text, but what that entailed to an Alexandrian scholar is unclear to us.

[^fn1]: West, *Studies in the Text and Transmission of the* Iliad. 2003: 61-62.

[^fn2]: Nagy, *Poetry as Performance*: 115-116.

[^fn3]: Nagy, *Poetry as Performance*: 115; also see footnote 40; Pfeiffer 1968: 215.

[^fn4]: Nagy, *Poetry as Performance*: 115-116.
	
[^fn5]: See Pfeiffer 1968: 216.
	
[^fn6]: Nagy, *Poetry as Performance*: 115-116. See also Eleanor Dickey’s definition for διόρθωσις in Dickey 2007: 232. Also see Pfeiffer’s discussion of Zenodotus, Aristarchus, and the verb διορθοῦν in Tzetzes in Pfeiffer 1968: 105-107, 110-111.

## On Commentaries ##

A ὑπόμνημα, as noted above, refers distinctly to a commentary. While this text may remark upon the readings of a text, it is not an edition of the text itself. One can think of the scholia as a separate document as a ὑπόμνημα. The term appears in an *Iliad* 8 scholion on line 8.296, <code concordion:set="#urn">urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA.hmt:8.199</code>, refering to the works of Diogenes of Tarsus, in the phrase <strong concordion:assertEquals="getPhrase(#urn)">φασὶ Διογένης. ἐν τοῖς ὑπομνήμασι</strong>. 

Notably in this scholion, the text appears to clearly paraphrase Diogenes, not just citing his reading but also his logic for the reading. A further examination of this term in the scholia should exlore whether it is always accompanied by a reason or whether it can simply indicate an alternate reading. 

## On Writing ##

The vaguest of scholarly works refered to in the *Iliad* 8 scholia is likely γραφή. Using an adjectival form of Aristarchus' name, but in the wrong (grammatically) gender, a scholion on 8.513, <code concordion:set="#urn">urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA.hmt:8.321</code>, uses the phrase <strong
concordion:assertEquals="getPhrase(#urn)">Ἀριστάρχειον γραφήν</strong> to compare the versions and useages of a particular word that appear in editions of Aristophanes and the grammarian Parmeniscus. 

The adjectival form of Aristarchus appears again in another scholion on 8.527, <code concordion:set="#urn">urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA.hmt:8.326</code>. Here, instead of an explicit noun, the scholion uses only the nominative singular feminine article as follows: <strong concordion:assertEquals="getPhrase(#urn)">ἡ Ἀριστάρχειος</strong>. With a few more examples from other books, we can determine what noun to supply with the article, if γραφή is used exclusively with the adjectival form of a scholars name. Again, we would expect Ἀριστάρχειος to agree with the article, but it may be that the scribe did not want to change the gender of Aristarchus even in the adjectival form where it would be appropriate. 

Most notably, the occurence of γραφή offers another possibility for the ambiguous feminine article and for how we should consider the texts written by the ancient Homeric scholars.

## The article with other authors ##

If we take the word implied by the feminine article to be ἔκδοσεις or διόρθωσις, then its plurality indicates, as many modern scholars have noted, that any scholar who appears in this construction wrote multiple editions of the *Iliad*. However, the debate has centered largely around Aristarchus due to his monumental influence upon the Homeric scholia. According to West’s theory, the nominative plural aἱ refers to these two distinct editions and not the commentaries, but we ought to keep in mind that the evidence for this theory is the scholia themselves and the scholia are not explicit. We should also note that the nominative plural itself does not imply specifically two, but only more than one of something. We must also keep in mind that the scholarly discussion I have outlined pertains only to the work of Aristarchus and does not consider the other ancient scholars similarly referenced with the nominative plural feminine article. With the ability to automate searches in a digital, diplomatic edition, I was able to run a systematic search through the scholia of *Iliad* 8 in both the Venetus A and the Y.I.1 to determine whether Aristarchus is the only such scholar. The evidence reveals he is not.

Aristophanes, a scholar two generations Aristarchus's senior, is cited in scholion <code concordion:set="#urn">urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA.hmt:8.321</code> on line 513, which reads <strong concordion:assertEquals="getPhrase(#urn)">αἱ Ἀριστοφάνους</strong>. While this is the clearest example of another scholar with the plural feminine article, a case can be made for Herodian in scholion <code concordion:set="#urn">urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026msA.hmt:8.199</code> on line 8.296, which reads <strong concordion:assertEquals="getPhrase(#urn)">οὕτως αἱ Ἀριστάρχου διὰ τοῦ γ δεδεγμένος· Ἡρῳδιανοῦ διὰ τοῦ χ δεδεχμένος</strong>. In this case, we have to assume a parallel construction with "αἱ Ἀριστάρχου" and "Ἡρῳδιανοῦ". Unfortunately the compressed nature of scholia provides few contexts clues as to the expanded version of the second part of the sentence.

## The article with Aristarchus ##

Other evidence besides the plural article might offer stronger support for the theory that Aristarchus wrote two distinct editions of the *Iliad*. For example a scholion on 8.213, <code concordion:set="#urn">urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA.hmt:8.152</code> reads <strong concordion:assertEquals="getPhrase(#urn)">διχῶς αἱ Ἀριστάρχου· "ἔεργε" καὶ "ἔρυκε"</strong>. Here the formulaic phrase also appears with διχῶς indicating that the scholion is going to offer two distinct readings for this particular line of text. However, we cannot be certain that the sources for these readings are two distinct editions. Aristarchus and his contemporaries wrote their texts before the advent of the codex. They wrote their editions on two sets of scrolls. One contained the main text of the *Iliad* and the other contained the commentary on the text. These texts were linked by critical signs, which are perserved at least in part in the Venetus A.[^fn7] In fact this particular line is marked with a {diple}[diple] in the Venetus A. It is not entirely out of the question that one of the two readings came from the edition of the text and another from the commentary.

[diple]: urn:cite:hmt:vaimg.VA104VN-0607@0.445,0.5004,0.02,0.0158

[^fn7]: see Bird, “Critical Signs” in *Recapturing Homeric Legacy* 2009: 92. 
	
Another scholion of Book Eight that may support the two edition theory is one that comments on 8.405, <code concordion:set="#urn">urn:cts:greekLit:tlg5026.msA.hmt:8.259</code>. This scholion cites a reading to the following source: <strong concordion:assertEquals="getPhrase(#urn)>"ἐν τῇ ἑτέρα τῶν Ἀριστάρχου</strong>.It is unclear what exactly is meant by ἑτέρα. What is this “other thing” of Aristarchus? If this reference is an indication that Aristarchus wrote two editions, then the ἑτέρα likely refers to the later one. The phrase is heavily compressed. The iota subscript--typically written adscript in the Venetus A--is missing from ἑτέρα but can easily be construed. However the genitive plural article τῶν indicates a missing masculine or neuter plural noun further deliminated by the genitive singular of Aristarchus. Therefore the full phrase is something like "in the other feminine thing of the masculine/neuter things of Aristarchus." 

I propose that the feminine singular article indicates some general noun that refers to a corpus of written texts of Aristarchus. This may be an edition in the sense of ἔκδοσεις or διόρθωσις, or they may be a very simple γραφή. The genitive plural article, I believe, refers ὑπομνήματα. In terms of the two edition theory, the reading cited in this scholion comes very specifically from the second of the two commentaries written by Aristarchus on the text of the *Iliad*. 

However, this is the only example that is so specific in the entirety of the *Iliad* 8 scholion in the Venetus A and Y.I.1 manuscripts. More definitive evidence will come from a wider survey of the remainder of the Homeric scholia. We might instead want to widely conclude that it was not uncommon for an ancient scholar to write multiple editions of a text and commentary. Many other ancient scholars referenced in the scholia seem to have done so. Instead we may want to reflect that Aristarchus became so well known for two do to his popular and authority with subsequent ancient and modern scholars. 
